RDBMS manual production architecture and installation (#7815)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/deployment/manual/rdbms/rdbms-production-architecture.md

## Recommended topology

For production deployments with RDBMS, Camunda recommends a **HA Zeebe cluster backed by an external managed RDBMS**:

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph oc["Orchestration Cluster (HA)"]
        direction TB
        subgraph brokers["Zeebe Brokers"]
            b1["Broker 1<br/>(AZ-1)"]
            b2["Broker 2<br/>(AZ-2)"]
            b3["Broker 3<br/>(AZ-3)"]
        end
        api["<b>Orchestration Cluster API (v2)</b>"]

        b1 -.->|gRPC| b2
        b2 -.->|gRPC| b3
        b1 -.->|gRPC| b3
    end

    subgraph storage["Secondary Storage"]
        rdbms["<b>External RDBMS</b><br/>PostgreSQL • MariaDB<br/>Oracle • MySQL • SQL Server<br/><br/>HA: 3-way replication<br/>across AZs"]
        opt["<b>Elasticsearch/OpenSearch</b><br/>(for Optimize only)"]
    end

    apiClients["Web UIs and API clients<br/>Operate • Tasklist • Identity<br/>HTTP/REST"]
    grpcClients["Workers and client apps<br/>gRPC (including Connectors/MCP Client)"]

    apiClients --> api

>     grpcClients --> brokers

Reviewer: I am not totally sure about this, because it shows gRPC and MCP going straight to the brokers, but the API (I assume this means REST API?) as a completely different thing. Do we already have a diagram we can be consistent with here? I imagine we kind of want to represent those three things more similarly than they appear here

    brokers -->|Export events| rdbms
    brokers -->|Export analytics<br/>Optional| opt

    style oc fill:#e1f5ff
    style storage fill:#fff3e0
    style api fill:#f3e5f5
```

### Key characteristics

**Clustering**

- Minimum three brokers for production HA
- Each broker in separate availability zone
- Default replication factor 3 (spans AZs)

**Secondary storage**

- Single external managed RDBMS instance
- Database handles replication and failover
- Camunda does not manage database HA

**Data flow**

- Processes are executed
- State is flushed to RDBMS

> - Operate and Tasklist access the Orchestration Cluster v2 API and do not directly access the database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Operate and Tasklist access the Orchestration Cluster v2 API and do not directly access secondary storage
```
Optional, just felt a little more consistent with how we normally talk in our docs

---
id: rdbms-production-architecture
sidebar_label: Production architecture
title: Production architecture for Camunda 8 with RDBMS
description: "Reference architecture for deploying Camunda 8 Self-Managed in production using an external RDBMS as secondary storage."
---

Understand reference architectures for running Camunda 8 Self-Managed in production with a relational database (RDBMS) as secondary storage, including supported topologies, Orchestration Cluster interactions, and critical constraints.

## Recommended topology

For production deployments with RDBMS, Camunda recommends a **HA Zeebe cluster backed by an external managed RDBMS**:

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph oc["Orchestration Cluster (HA)"]
        direction TB
        subgraph brokers["Zeebe Brokers"]
            b1["Broker 1<br/>(AZ-1)"]
            b2["Broker 2<br/>(AZ-2)"]
            b3["Broker 3<br/>(AZ-3)"]
        end

>         stateless["<b>Stateless Components</b><br/>Operate • Tasklist<br/>Identity • Connectors"]

Author: Updated the diagram so UIs and other clients consume the Orchestration Cluster API, and renamed “components” to “applications and services” I can also add an explicit arrow from “applications and services” to the API to indicate they provide it?

    brokers -->|Export analytics<br/>Optional| opt

    style oc fill:#e1f5ff
    style storage fill:#fff3e0
    style api fill:#f3e5f5
```

### Key characteristics

**Clustering**

- Minimum three brokers for production HA
- Each broker in separate availability zone
- Default replication factor 3 (spans AZs)

**Secondary storage**

- Single external managed RDBMS instance
- Database handles replication and failover
- Camunda does not manage database HA

**Data flow**

- Processes are executed
- State is flushed to RDBMS
- Operate and Tasklist access the Orchestration Cluster API and do not directly access the database (v2 API)

## When Elasticsearch/OpenSearch is required

Elasticsearch or OpenSearch is required **only for Optimize**. When Optimize is enabled:

- Deploy Elasticsearch/OpenSearch alongside your RDBMS
- Enable the Elasticsearch or OpenSearch exporter to store analytics data
- The Orchestration Cluster uses RDBMS as secondary storage

Without Optimize: RDBMS-only stack is fully supported.

## Production constraints

❌ **ES/OS ↔ RDBMS migration not supported**: Choose your secondary storage backend before production. No automated migration tools available.

> ❌ **Uniform broker configuration required**: All brokers in a Zeebe cluster must export to the same secondary storage backend. You may run Elasticsearch/OpenSearch only to support Optimize, but the cluster still uses a single backend for its own secondary storage.

Reviewer: Can you elaborate a little here on what you are trying to express and maybe I can help in making this clearer?

Author: I’m trying to say two things:

- There’s no supported migration path between RDBMS and ES/OS for secondary storage, so you need to pick one before production (no automated tooling to switch later).
- In a cluster, every broker must be configured to export to the same secondary storage backend for the Orchestration Cluster. You can still run ES/OS alongside RDBMS for Optimize, but that’s only for analytics and doesn’t change the single secondary storage choice for the cluster.

---
id: rdbms-production-architecture
sidebar_label: Production architecture
title: Production architecture for Camunda 8 with RDBMS
description: "Reference architecture for deploying Camunda 8 Self-Managed in production using an external RDBMS as secondary storage."
---

Understand reference architectures for running Camunda 8 Self-Managed in production with a relational database (RDBMS) as secondary storage, including supported topologies, Orchestration Cluster interactions, and critical constraints.

## Recommended topology

For production deployments with RDBMS, Camunda recommends a **HA Zeebe cluster backed by an external managed RDBMS**:

```
Orchestration Cluster (HA)
├── Zeebe Broker 1 (AZ-1)
├── Zeebe Broker 2 (AZ-2)
├── Zeebe Broker 3 (AZ-3)
└── Operate, Tasklist, Connectors (stateless)
         ↓
    External RDBMS

>     (PostgreSQL, MariaDB, Oracle, MySQL, SQL Server)

Reviewer: I feel a bit like we are always listing the DB options, and we don't have consistency about how we do this. For example, sometimes we include Aurora, other times we don't. I think even the order can change.

Do you think it would make sense to define a more common term we can use, i.e. `RDBMS`, and then just reference specifics only when strictly needed?

Author: Standardized on "RDBMS" throughout and removed exhaustive database lists from overviews/diagrams. Specific databases are now only listed where needed (JDBC drivers, tutorials, component-specific features), with all references pointing to the RDBMS support policy as the source of truth.

    HA: 3-way replication across AZs
```

### Key characteristics

**Zeebe clustering**

- Minimum three brokers for production HA
- Each broker in separate availability zone
- Default replication factor 3 (spans AZs)

**Secondary storage**

- Single external managed RDBMS instance
- Database handles replication and failover
- Camunda does not manage database HA

**Data flow**

> - Zeebe processes work

Reviewer: And this could just be `Processes are executed` or similar

Without Optimize: RDBMS-only stack is fully supported.

## Production constraints

❌ **ES/OS ↔ RDBMS migration not supported**: Choose your secondary storage backend before production. No automated migration tools available.

❌ **Mixed storage modes not supported**: All Zeebe brokers must use the same storage backend (cannot mix RDBMS and ES/OS).

❌ **v1 API not supported**: Only the v2 Orchestration Cluster REST API works with RDBMS. See [migrate to the Orchestration Cluster API](/apis-tools/migration-manuals/migrate-to-camunda-api.md).

❌ **No automatic fallback**: If RDBMS becomes unavailable, Zeebe continues processing in-memory but cannot export. Pending operations queue until database recovers.

## Network and security

- **Zeebe ↔ RDBMS**: Low-latency, private network connectivity
- **All components ↔ RDBMS**: Use TLS in production
- **Network isolation**: Restrict RDBMS access to Camunda pods only (use NetworkPolicies)

## Supported scenarios

✅ **Single-node orchestration + external RDBMS** (non-HA, acceptable for non-critical workloads)

✅ **HA Zeebe cluster + external managed RDBMS** (recommended for production)

> ✅ **Separate RDBMS per Orchestration Cluster or team** (advanced use case: different backup schedules, HA policies, compliance requirements)

Author: Removed 👍

✅ **Managed database services** (AWS Aurora, Azure Database, GCP Cloud SQL)

## Orchestration Cluster component details

- **Zeebe**: Exporter flushes at configurable intervals (default 0.5s)
- **Operate and Tasklist**: Access the Orchestration Cluster API (v2), stateless, scalable independently

> - **Optimize**: Requires Elasticsearch/OpenSearch (cannot use RDBMS)

Author: Incorporated a simple architecture diagram but should be verified 👍

description: "Reference architecture for deploying Camunda 8 Self-Managed in production using an external RDBMS as secondary storage."
---

Understand the recommended architecture for running Camunda 8 Self-Managed in production with a relational database (RDBMS) as secondary storage, including supported topologies, component interactions, and critical constraints.

## Recommended topology

For production deployments with RDBMS, Camunda recommends a **HA Zeebe cluster backed by an external managed RDBMS**:

```
Orchestration Cluster (HA)
├── Zeebe Broker 1 (AZ-1)
├── Zeebe Broker 2 (AZ-2)
├── Zeebe Broker 3 (AZ-3)
└── Operate, Tasklist, Connectors (stateless)
         ↓
    External RDBMS
    (PostgreSQL, MariaDB, Oracle, MySQL, SQL Server)
    HA: 3-way replication across AZs
```

### Key characteristics

**Zeebe clustering**

- Minimum three brokers for production HA
- Each broker in separate availability zone
- Default replication factor 3 (spans AZs)

**Secondary storage**

- Single external managed RDBMS instance
- Database handles replication and failover
- Camunda does not manage database HA

**Data flow**

- Zeebe processes work
- RdbmsExporter flushes state to RDBMS

> - Operate, Tasklist, Connectors read from shared RDBMS schema

Reviewer: I don't think this is how we should position things anymore. With v2 API, the idea is that Operate and Tasklist are basically just thin UIs that use exclusively the API and do not interact with the DB at all

## When Elasticsearch/OpenSearch is required

Elasticsearch or OpenSearch is required **only for Optimize**. When Optimize is enabled:

- Deploy Elasticsearch/OpenSearch alongside your RDBMS
- Enable Zeebe exporter to push analytics data

> - All other components (Zeebe, Operate, Tasklist, Connectors) use RDBMS only

Author: @camunda/connectors-dev -- flagging if a team member could have a look.

Without Optimize: RDBMS-only stack is fully supported.

## Production constraints

❌ **ES/OS ↔ RDBMS migration not supported**: Choose your secondary storage backend before production. No automated migration tools available.

❌ **Mixed storage modes not supported**: All Zeebe brokers must use the same storage backend (cannot mix RDBMS and ES/OS).

❌ **v1 API not supported**: Only the v2 Orchestration Cluster REST API works with RDBMS. See [migrate to the Orchestration Cluster API](/apis-tools/migration-manuals/migrate-to-camunda-api.md).

❌ **No automatic fallback**: If RDBMS becomes unavailable, Zeebe continues processing in-memory but cannot export. Pending operations queue until database recovers.

## Network and security

> - **Zeebe ↔ RDBMS**: Low-latency, private network connectivity

Reviewer: I mean't more the connection between Zeebe and RDBMS. It doesn't feel like it's very representative of our 8.9 architecture. We have the RDBMS exporter now, it's it not really synonymous with Zeebe. Rather, the orchestration cluster interacts with the underlying RDBMS

- **All components ↔ RDBMS**: Use TLS in production
- **Network isolation**: Restrict RDBMS access to Camunda pods only (use NetworkPolicies)

## Supported scenarios

✅ **Single-node orchestration + external RDBMS** (non-HA, acceptable for non-critical workloads)

✅ **HA Zeebe cluster + external managed RDBMS** (recommended for production)

✅ **Separate RDBMS per component** (advanced use case: different backup schedules, HA policies, compliance requirements per component)

✅ **Managed database services** (AWS Aurora, Azure Database, GCP Cloud SQL)

## Component-specific notes

- **Zeebe**: Exporter flushes at configurable intervals (default 0.5s)

> - **Operate/Tasklist**: Read-only access to shared RDBMS schema, stateless, scalable independently

Reviewer: Let's merge and stop referring these as separate things (similar to a bunch of other comments I made above)
